---
title: PMC Reporting
---

A PMC is required to file a report to the Board of Directors every
quarter, on a schedule determined by the Board.

You can find your project's reporting schedule on
[projects.apache.org](https://projects.apache.org/committees.html). You
will also receive a reminder from the Secretary a few weeks prior to
your report's due date.

The *official* record of PMC reporting schedules is the file
[committee-info.txt](https://svn.apache.org/repos/private/committers/board/committee-info.txt)
(requires password authentication).

## Writing a report

The report to the board is expected to contain certain sections. See the
[detailed instructions for writing a board
report](https://www.apache.org/foundation/board/reporting).

You may (but are not required to) use the [reporter
tool](https://reporter.apache.org) to draft your report. However, do
**not** simply submit an auto-generated report. You are expected to take
this time to be introspective about your project's health, short- and
long-term objectives, and any risks or concerns facing your project.

Important things you should mention might include (but are not limited to):

* Changes to technology trends that will influence the direction of your
  project
* A very active individual, or company, entering or exiting from the project
* A merger or acquisition between active participant organizations in
  your project
* A boost or decline in your project's momentum, or popularity, that may 
  result in community changes

Remember that reports are made public once the board minutes are
approved, and craft your phrasing accordingly. Sections that are
intended to be Foundation-confidential should be enclosed in *private*
tags, as described in the formal documentation above.

While the Chair can write the report on their own, you are encouraged to
consult with the entire PMC for input on the report, perhaps even
drafting it with everyone able to contribute.

The report can be submitted via the [reporter
tool](https://reporter.apache.org), the [agenda
tool](https://whimsy.apache.org/board/agenda), or committed directly to
the [subversion
repository](https://svn.apache.org/repos/private/foundation/board).

