---
title: ASF Contributor Ladder
---

Projects at the ASF offer a way to grow in your responsibilites in the
project, from being a user, all the way up to being a maintainer of the
project. While the specific details may look different from one project
to another, the rungs of the ladder look mostly the same.


* [User](#user)
* [Contributor](#contributor)
* [Committer](#committer)
* [PMC Member](#pmc-member)

## User

Everything that we do in an ASF project is for the user. As a user of an
Apache project, your responsibilities are just to enjoy the software.

We encourage you to join the user mailing list to ask questions, and
make suggestions. Members of the project are there to help out when you
run into problems. You can find this list (or lists) by looking under the
project name on [lists.apache.org](https://lists.apache.org).

As a user, you're expected to abide by the project's [code of
conduct](https://www.apache.org/foundation/policies/conduct), so that
interactions are polite, friendly, and helpful.

As you become a power user of the project, you may consider becoming a
contributor.

## Contributor

While most people think of open source contributors as being coders,
there are a wider variety of ways that you can contribute to a project.

Most user's first contribution will be to open a ticket on the project's
issue tracker, or to answer a less experienced user's questions. These
actions help shape the future direction of the project, and are
important contributions.

We encourage you to join the project's developer mailing list at this
time, to engage with the dicussions about the direction that the project
is taking. You can find this list (or lists) by looking under the
project name on [lists.apache.org](https://lists.apache.org).

Other contributions may include design, promotion, documentation
improvements, events, and may other things.

[See more about being a contributor](/contributors).

As you become more involved with contributint to the project, you may
want to work towards [becoming a
committer](/contribotirs/becomingacommitter).

## Committer

After making a number of contributions to a project, you may be invited
to become a committer. Note that the criteria for inviting a contributor
to become a committer will vary greatly from one project to another.

Once you have been invited to becomg a committer, and have accepted this
invitation, you are authorized to commit changed directly to the
project's source code repository. Note, however, that different projects
may have different social norms around committing changes.

Broadly referred to as CTR (Commit Then Review) and RTC (Review The
Commit), the exact mechanisms may vary. For example, you may be
authorized to commit documentation changes without approval, while code
changes may be submitted as a pull request, for other committers to
review and approve before they are merged.

[See more information about being a committer](/committers).

## PMC Member

After being a committer for some time, you may be invited to be a member
of the project's Project Management Committee. This group acts as the
steering committee for the project, making decisions about the project's
road map, what features will be added, and other decisions around the
project.

The PMC *should* be conducting all of these conversations on the public
developer mailing list(s), in the view of the entire community. A PMC
also has a private mailing list, which is for discussion of topics such
as the addition of new committers and PMC members, and any other
sensitive topics.

[See more information about being a PMC member](/pmc).


